cool so yeah good afternoon everyone my
name is Karl I work for a company called
October I work writing automated trading
systems and I've done that for about 10
years in total and so today's talk is
just going to be basically a day in the
life of a developer of high-frequency
trading systems I'm also a member of SG
40 so I try to give a little bit of
feedback from the trading community and
to the standards ie what's important
from a low latency perspective from
trading but I'm definitely not a C++
expert these people in this room who
will know ten times more about C++ than
me it's not necessarily a problem though
you just need to be really good at
measurement you need to be really good
at a plain scientific method you need to
understand the tools if you can do that
and you can measure and you can measure
well you can write very very fast
software without knowing the standard
inside out so I'm going to give a very
quick overview of what we do won't go
into that in much detail because they
can take an hour or two just by itself
but I will talk about the technical
challenges that we face those two topics
are just an introductory then we're
going to get into the real stuff which
is the actual techniques that I use on a
daily basis for writing fast C++ I
mentioned some surprises some war
stories and then finally I'm going to
discuss how to measure C++ and that's
probably the most important few slides
of the talk it's it's really all about
measurement if you want fast code
cool another thing is that I would
absolutely love to be able to discuss
absolutely every optimization trick out
there but I can't just not enough time I
just had a run-through of my slides this
morning threw away about half of them so
yeah this is only a very very brief
example into optimation to optimization
techniques for low latency so low
latency not high throughput not trying
to process 60 100 frames a second but
just trying to be very very fast when
you need to be fast so what do we do
well most market makers providing
liquidity to the market that basically
means we're providing prices to the
market to say we're willing to buy this
instrument for a certain amount we're
willing to sell it for a certain amount
for more than that by instruments I mean
a tradable product a starka future an
option it's just pure coincidence that
these instruments on the table over
there not those sorts of instruments
let's have some challenges you need to
be moving your prices quite regularly if
you don't move your prices you'll miss
out on the trade or even worse you'll
get the trade but it wasn't what you're
looking for because you didn't move your
price fast enough and someone else has
lifted you on that
so what market makers do is they try to
just make the difference between buying
and selling this they want to buy a
stock then sell it again sell it buy it
that will hopefully balance itself out
so market makers own and you know
quantitative funds or hedge funds or
anything like that that they're not
looking to build a position with the
intention that the markets going to go
up or down they're really just trying to
make a small amount of profit by buying
and selling fairly frequently ultimately
this always comes down to two things
buying low selling high yeah there's
some complex maths in there sometimes it
gets ya a little bit complex but
ultimately that's what all trading
algorithms come down to
and success means being just slightly
faster than your competitors doesn't
need to be by a second it can be a
picosecond just as long as you're faster
I think this is quite a nice picture
actually because gives you an idea yeah
like no one no one really remembers who
comes second or third or fourth in a
race right and it's kind of the same
thing with electronic market making you
really need to be the guy out in front
but safety first a lot can go wrong in a
very very short period of time so you
need to be able to detect errors and get
out not the other way around
you don't want to think about things
then get out of the market you want to
get out then figure out what's gone
wrong because a lot can go wrong in a
few seconds that's best automated
obviously it's a good quote okay so I'm
going to talk about the hot path a lot
too sometimes I'll say fast path but
it's the same thing this is the code
which sees a message from the exchange
decodes it figures out that this is an
interesting event this is a price change
this is a trade this is something a
market open event executes the auto
trading strategy decides it wants to
trade run some risk checks make sure
that that's okay
and then finally seems a order to the
exchange to say I'd like to trade or I'd
like to change my price or something
like that that's the hot path the
characteristics of the hot path are
quite interesting probably one to five
percent of the total codebase and it
gets executed very very infrequently
maybe point zero one percent of the time
you'll actually have that hot path fully
execute now that's at odds with the
operating system the hardware the
network basically everything in the room
is at odds with trying to execute a hot
path not very frequently but when it
executes very very fast very little
latency
so even networks for example we're based
on fairness which makes sense they want
to catch up but until there's enough for
a packet to be fully sent in the packets
sent and you know make sure that no one
sender is saturating the network and the
same with operating systems are all
about you know multitasking in cod4
differ multitasking these are things
that you don't actually want from a low
latency perspective one final point
jitter you don't want to be fast most of
the time that sometimes you're slow if
you're fast four times out of five
that's great but if their fifth time
you're so slow that you end up with a
bad trait because you didn't move your
price or you missed out well if you miss
out you miss an opportunity but if you
get hit on a bad order or a bad trade
that can be quite expensive so it's very
frustrating you can have code which runs
faster on average a lower median but the
standard deviation is to wait that's
actually not a good thing you prefer a
tighter deviation than an agile faster
median so weird as C++ come into this
well it's a language of choice within
trading companies and that's no
coincidence it's low cost you get
basically zero cost abstractions you can
get your hands on the hardware
reasonably but it's still a relatively
abstract language that's great that's
what we want but there's some catches
your compiler and compiler version
building link Flags different libraries
that you're using the machine
architecture these are all going to
impact your code and they all
unfortunately have interactions with
each other as well so you really need to
not just know C++ well but figure out
what the compiler is actually generating
anyone no app for that very very useful
no coincidence that this comes from a
trading company you'll learn more about
that on Friday I believe but tools like
this is great you can change the
compiler flags see what happens
have a look at what the actual resulting
assembly is change your versions compare
claim to GCC it's
8c when which version of the compiler
actually made a change to your code if
you notice a regression now I should
point out as well I don't know how to
write assembly code but I do know how to
read a little bit of assembly code and
that's great
so from a performance point of view I
know that a call or a jump is going to
be expensive I know that more machine
code is probably more expensive than
less machine code I know that if I have
fewer jumps more conditional moves and
things like that we're on to a good
thing here now just to talk a tiny bit
about system tuning the C files press
conference so I can't go into this in
too much detail but it's worth just
pointing this out so you can have
exactly the same hardware exactly the
same operating system the same binary
they're saying everything but put them
on as slightly and a slightly different
configuration from a bios point of view
or a linux churning kernel turning point
of view you'll get different results so
the blue server is machined it is not
running high for 3d the honor server is
a machine that is running hyper
threading this is sorting different size
vectors of random integers why is the
hyper threading oh this is a single
threaded test running on one CPU why
would the hyper threading slow us down
here but what do a what's common between
the two threads on a core if you're
hyper threading - exactly so you're
sharing the same cache so your cash
either goes down to 50% or more likely
it goes down to zero because these
something else running on the second
thread hyper threading is great I'm not
here to bag on hyper threading I use it
at home on my desktop why not it turns
four cores into eight but for a
production server running low latency
trading software yeah things like that
will catch you out
you don't need to know about this from a
super-fast development point of view but
you better hope that there's someone in
your company who can take care of that
for you otherwise you've already lost
unfortunately so how fast is fast the
Burj Khalifa in Dubai 2,700 feet tall
very tall building tallest in the world
at the moment
speed of light coincidentally is a round
about one foot per nanosecond so if we
developed a auto trading system that ran
into n Dwight away from seeing the
packet in to performing all of the logic
and sending a packet back out to the
exchange in say two and a half
microseconds well that's actually less
time than it takes for light to travel
from the top of the spire of this
building to the ground that's not a lot
of time so when you go oh well it's
alright the machine might be swapping a
little bit at the moment it will go out
to main memory or it doesn't matter that
someone else is using our case at the
moment well it does or all bets are off
at this point like you've lost the game
at this point there's such little time
to actually execute your code
okay so that's the introduction stunt
I've got about 10 to 15 coding examples
I've just low latency techniques that
have actually helped me and production
make the code faster this isn't just
micro benchmarking and saying yeah this
appears faster this is actual code
that's being tested in production and
it's made a serious difference most of
these will be I speak most of these will
be somewhat obvious to some people in
the room other people maybe not so don't
be too worried if some things you
already know hopefully there's a few
surprises in there for you still so this
gave me about a 100 200 nanoseconds
speed-up a couple months ago when I did
it which was removing the code on the
left and replacing it with the code on
the right why would this be faster so
indeed the compiler can optimize the hot
path better what else yes so two answers
at once and they were both separate and
they were both correct once hid cash
prediction once a branch prediction I
think or caching branching yeah so
branch prediction there's fewer branches
on the right-hand side for the hardware
branch predictor to deal with and cache
this is good is on the right is a bitter
for your instruction cache or your
dedication both I don't think he's hit
both I claim it's both yeah you've got
fewer instructions less pressure on the
instruction cache and also who knows
what these error handling functions are
actually doing maybe they're trampling
your data cache as well where it's now
we've only got one integer that we're
actually reading and writing to and
machine architectures are incredibly
good at testing if an integer is zero or
nonzero
so I mean it does this seem obvious or
it after I did it it was like why am I
not doing this all the time but yeah
just things like this can really make a
difference
hi yeah yeah
so we're is the arrow chicken code so
the error checking code is behind the
scenes its miles away but if there's any
flag that has been set by anything
before heading this hot path we'll set a
flag to say do not go any further
yeah then in this handle error they can
figure out what the actual error is deal
with it is that kind of answer you quit
yeah okay another quite simple example
but I say this quite a fee a bit which
is template based configuration so but
the lack of template based configuration
sometimes you don't know everything at
compile time so maybe you're going to
read from configuration and based on
that you're going to instantiate one
type of class or another type of class
but you don't know what what class
you're actually going to instantiate
most people will use virtual functions
for this virtual functions are
absolutely fine if you don't know what
class you're going to instantiate if you
don't know all of the possible classes
if you know the complete set of things
that may be instantiated then you don't
really need virtual function so you can
just use templates for this and again
this is a very simple example but I
think it's often overlooked and I see
virtual calls going all the way through
code and enter the hot path and it is
slow and it is not required you see this
all the time in the STL and it works
really really well so here we've got two
classes they both send orders order
center 1 order Center tool a and B and
we've got an order manager which uses
one of those two types we don't know
which one and it doesn't know which one
it's templated at this point in time now
there is a virtual function call and the
other main loop about that's just to
start the program so that virtual calls
going to disappear before you know about
it but the actual calls to this order
Center and non-virtual concrete type
how do you hook this up just use a
factory function yeah look at your
configuration and then instantiate the
correct type pass it in and you're done
no need for virtuals you know it's not
this is not a you know I won't win any
awards with the slide about so many
times I notice that people myth myth
these sorts of things
you know everything at compile time you
know the complete set of things that can
happen use that information to make your
code fast no virtuals faster code more
compact code more chance for the
optimizer to optimize less pressure on
the instruction cache this pressure on
the data cache it's a good thing in the
next one lambda functions this will not
give you a speed up this slide will not
give you a speed up but it's a nice
example of how C++ can be fast and
powerful but still relatively expressive
as well so on the Left we've got a
function called send message takes in a
lambda prepares a message invokes the
lender since the message on the right is
the actual usage so here we're calling
it send message we need to pass at Al
and earth so here's the lambda the
lambda takes a message and then it just
populaces now this could very well be as
follows
send message on the left the prepare
message is an allocating memory or
anything like that it's just getting the
network cards buffer via DMA and
returning that the lambda will
definitely get in line out two moves
which is this low-level which you can
get sent could be as simple as flipping
one single bit on the network card to
tell the network card to send so there's
very very low-level very powerful very
fast in fact the entire function there
on the left end message will probably
get and land as well depending on what
you're doing with it so it's very very
nice very very fast but still relatively
high level language so you can see why
so fast bus is somewhat the language of
choice here
quick show of hands who knows that
memory allocation is slow good so that
should be no surprise for you use a pool
of objects I don't care how it's done
you can use an alligator you can do it
by hand I don't mind but definitely try
to reuse and recycle objects be careful
with distracting objects as well this
can get expensive underneath all of this
will be a call to free freeze actually
relatively expensive if you go and have
a look through G lib see it's about four
hundred lines of code yeah you're not
going to hit every single line of code
each time but even the act of deleting
objects can be relatively expensive so
do watch that okay exceptions our
exceptions slow if you don't drop into
them and throw yeah so absolutely if you
have an exception that's thrown from my
measurement it's one or two micros but
as far as I can tell enough measure this
a lot I've really tried to measure this
in many many different ways exceptions
are claimed to be a zero cost thing as
long as they don't throw as far as I can
tell that is absolutely true so don't be
afraid of exceptions of course if they
throw it's going to be expensive but if
an exception is thrown you've got a
problem anyway you're not going to be
sending in order anymore so don't use
exceptions for control flow yeah one
it's gonna be slow and two
your code is going to look really really
bad this is a little bit similar to a
previous slide you don't really need if
statements particularly your hot path
branching is bad branching is expensive
and you can remove quite a fair bit of
it so here we've got a branching
approach of running a strategy where we
calculate a price checks and risk limits
and then send the order and if you look
at the implementation of one of these
methods you know here's our branching if
the site is a buy then we want
ask for a bit of a discount enough
otherwise it must be a sell so asking
for a little bit of a premium it's
pretty simple in this you know that
should run relatively fast but we know
at compile time
they can either only be a buy or a sell
there's no third value and we know what
we want to do in both cases we know that
we want to either ask for a premium or
ask for a discount so you can just
template specialize this completely away
to the point where you have just
completely deterministic non-branching
code don't go crazy with this don't
remove every single if from your code it
will look really bad and will probably
end up signing your code down right in
the hot path you can go a long way with
absolutely removing branches completely
from your code hi often so question was
can't the optimizer optimize this out in
theory I guess it probably can and
practice it normally doesn't and
actually there is a very very good point
so much of this is just guaranteeing
that the compiler is going to do what
you would expect it to do you're kind of
locking the compiler in to say hey I
really want you to know that there's
only two particular branches here or two
particular conditions so a lot of it is
just basically taking the risk out of it
and being very very concrete with
telling the compiler what you want to do
multi-threading
I don't like multi-threading I know that
you need it sometimes I know that you
don't want to be doing everything in the
hot path I know that you need to
sometimes maybe have a second thread on
a different CPU or a different process
on a second CPU or a second core doing
some heavy lifting doing some
calculations responding to messages and
things like that okay I get that you
need multi-threading that keep the data
that you share between the hot path and
everything else to the absolute minimum
you can do that you're going to get away
with faster code than otherwise
so consider not even sharing data
consider just throwing copies of data
across from the producer to the consumer
maybe a lot free single router single
reader queue yeah you're still sharing a
little bit there you're sharing the
atomic read and write pointers for the
queue but there's actually not much data
this year I think I think that's a
reasonable approach of course sometimes
you don't even need to worry about
multi-threading sometimes that was hairy
protection over multi-threading
sometimes receiving things out of order
is actually okay it's not the end of the
world sometimes the machine architecture
is so strong that it will actually avoid
the race conditions that you've read
about anyway so it's worth experimenting
with that sure about halfway through now
I think of the tips and tricks section
the next one in data lookups so if you
read a software engineering textbook
it'll probably suggest that if you have
instrument that you want to trade on and
a market and each instrument has one
market and a market can have many
instruments so you can see the ER
diagram for me you'll do a lookup so you
go okay so this code here would make
sense so you create your message that
you want to seem to the exchange and
you'll go look up the market and you'll
get the information out of the market
and that will be part of your
computation so that's fine okay that's
not a problem
but you can do things a lot faster than
that if you're going to read the
instrument if you're going to read the
price the current price of the
instrument how many bytes have you read
there how BIG's our float for boats okay
so how many bytes have we read 64 why
have we read 64 so we've read
occasionally we can't we can't do
anything about that that's how the
machine works so why not put the
information that you need into that cash
flow so if you know that you always need
to read say for example the quantity
multiplier from the market and there
hardly ever changes will they not change
at all that day put it into the
instrument you're going to be breeding
that cash line anyway and then you get
that for free no further look apps
you're done it's denormalized might
violate a few software engineering
principles but that's okay you're going
to get faster code containers containers
are worth a handful of slides I've got
about four slides on and ordered map so
you need something to do block apps on
sometimes you are going to have to look
at data so that's fine so this is your
likely implementation of an unordered
map you have multiple buckets you have a
key the key gets hashed the hash will
corresponds to one and only one bucket
and your key and value appear will go
into the bucket and if you get multiple
peers of keys and values that map to the
same bucket then you'll get a chaining
effect so this will be one linked list
underneath the hood default max load
factor of one so on average there will
be one item per bucket order one into it
order one find unordered map is kind of
your go-to map if you want fast
containers within C class plus and you
want to just use the STL
yeah and by the way the original
proposal is in the bottom right really
worth a read and it's really good
description of how unordered maps and
unordered sets are implemented linked
lists are not guaranteed to be in
contiguous memory so you really don't
want to be jumping around to this linked
list looking for your key you want to
find it the first time yeah so I did an
experiment recently where I took ten
thousand I generated ten thousand keys
and I generated from them from the range
0 through to 1 trillion then I put them
inserted all of them into a unordered
map then I asked each node how many
other nodes are in your bucket and this
is a distribution that I got back most
notes are in a bucket or by themselves
but only just you will get collisions
this was a uniform distribution you are
going to get collisions unless you have
a perfect hashing function which in this
case I deliberately didn't have but I
had a pretty good hashing function use
standard uniform an inter distribution
so if we go back you will from time to
time have to run through your notes to
find the key it's not always going to be
the first one
so let's time this this is on Google
benchmark for the top half of this line
anyone use Google benchmark yeah it's
good good to see if you haven't already
check it out as fantastic for
parameterizing
micro benchmarks 40 nanoseconds through
to 24 nanoseconds so you can see that's
reasonable
and you can see that speed of the find
is broadly related to the number of
elements in the collection there's a
Linux perf output and the second half of
the slide there nothing too surprising
in there instructions per cycle is a
little bit low but these are also quite
a few quite a few but it's stalling
going on there as well and if you do the
math that means that broadly one out of
five hundred cache
references is actually occasion as'
so-so or you can use something like
Google's DHS hash map fast a little bit
of complexity around management of
collisions but that's ok so given the
choice I'd get for this well you can
ignore Yuans suggestion this morning if
not reimplemented anything can there you
see are related to hash tables and take
a hybrid take the best of both worlds
that's what we do it opted for a lot of
our speed sensitive code is we have a
slightly different hash table lots of
different implementations of hash tables
plenty on the internet Peggy oh yes one
what I'm going to do is just quickly
describe what we use at Optima it's
quite a neat approach maybe you do
something similar at your company I
don't know we have something like this
so the keys and values are just anywhere
they could be in a separate collection
or it could just be heap-allocated it
really doesn't matter too much the table
itself is actually a pre computed hash
and a pointer to the object and that's
your hash table so it's like a hash
table of metadata importantly the hash
eight bytes the pointer eight bytes so
each pair is sixteen bytes you can put
four of those in occasionally which
means that when you read one you've read
another three more than likely as well
which means that you've already
prefetched in any subsequent data that
you might need to resolve the conflict
so we take an example if we look for key
73 if this is an integer key thing well
the hash is just 73 as well maybe this
index is 2 index one don't index one the
hash is 73 ok great we've probably found
what we're looking for follow the
pointer yeah the key is 73 as well okay
great we're done if we take another
example key 12 Maps the hash 12 maybe
this thin indexes or heaven-sent index
slot number 3 based on the
implementation at least check the hash
the hash is 98 ah ok there so there's a
collision there
right we'll just follow it to the right
what's the next hash value
okay that's hash value 12 great that's
what we're looking for follow that
pointer yeah
there's our key they said value very
case efficient don't take my word for it
so if we micro benchmark this twice as
fast it seems to be less susceptible to
the size of the collection instructions
per cycle are looking a lot healthier
now double if not triple and only about
one out of 1,500 case references is
actually cache miss so just a more cache
friendly implementation of a hash table
there may be a talk later today about
hash tables like this possibly by sorry
it's a Wednesday yes there may be a talk
on Wednesday about this okay couple more
to go always in line and no one line the
inline keyword is incredibly confusing
inline does not mean please in line in
line means there may be multiple
definitions that's okay
linker please overlook it if you want
something to be inlined you're far
better to use GCC and clanks attributes
to say force this to be in line please
or force us to not be in mind now
dragon's light here you need to be
careful about this in lining can make
your code faster in lining can make a
code slower not in lining can also give
you either of those two alternatives
again you need to measure look at this
look at the disassembly path even get a
actually measure and production so just
a trivial example here but we're going
to check the market and if we decide
that we're not going to send the order
cuz something's gone wrong
do some logging otherwise seen the order
now if this is in line if the compiler
goes hey that's not a bad function to in
mind it doesn't take too many parameters
yeah sure let's inline it by not you're
going to pollute your instruction cache
you've got all of this logging code
which you don't really want in the hot
path right there in the middle of the
hub path so this is an easy one just
know one line this that'll drop out
that'll turn to a call chances are the
branch predictable
well two things chances are the compiler
will pick the right branch and even
better at runtime the branch predictable
probably be picking the right branch all
the time for you can I talk about the
branch predictor more very soon by the
way the hardware branch predictor I'm
gonna talk about the hardware branch
predictor right now yes it turns out
okay this is the most important slide
out of the 15 or so tips and tricks this
gives me a 5 microsecond speed up on my
code or in other words whenever I screw
this up the system's run 5 microseconds
slower so much in fact I have a flow
chart on my desk which basically goes
earlier 5 microseconds slower yes did
you screw up dummy orders yes fix it and
go back to the start so this is what
happens in practice you hardly ever
execute the fast path the hot path and I
see there's that right at the start I'm
gonna say it again
the fast path is very seldomly executed
maybe you get closer than you decide
actually I can't because of risk limits
the next market data that comes in is an
interesting the next is but again the
strategy decides I've already got enough
of that instrument I don't want to trade
it then eventually at some point are
great there's an order we want to go for
let's shoot for it now on top of this
there's other things going on which I
haven't put on the board on the graph
but things like you know that unordered
map that's trampling all over occasion
other things that are traveling over air
cash handling other messages that are
coming in doing background processing so
how do we fix this how do we keep the
cash shot well we pretend we live in a
different universe where everything that
we do results in an order being sent to
the exchange here's a tip you really
don't want to send everything to the
exchange they'll get very annoyed with
you very quickly but you can pretend so
as long as you've got confidence that
you can stop this
before it gets to the exchange ie within
your own software within your own
control then pick a number from
somewhere between a thousand to ten
thousand and that's going to be the
number of times that you simulate
sending an order through your system if
you're using your low latency network
card such as Mellanox or Solar Flare
chances are even the card will allow you
to do this like it this is industry
practice it understands that people want
to pushed out onto the card but not
seemed it it's just warming the card so
network cards will support this so
that's great so basically saturate your
system with I'm gonna send an order I'm
gonna send an order I'm gonna seen an
order bang I did seem in order yeah
keeps your instruction cache hot yeah
nothing else nothing's gonna get evicted
if you're doing that probably keeps your
data cache hot if you're picking the
right data and it trains your hardware
branch predictor your branch predictor
if it's just done the same thing ten
thousand times before in the last second
chances are it's going to pick the right
path this time high yeah good questions
do I use profile guided optimization and
yeah sometimes in many different ways
yeah so profile guided optimization is
kind of a substitute for this but again
that's only at something that you can do
it compile time and it's not going to
help with the hardware at runtime but
indeed yeah profile guided optimization
is great except you can over fit the
model so profile gutter optimization is
effectively you you run a simulation or
maybe even run in production where you
you're writing to a profiling file if
what's actually happening with your
system then you recompile with that
information and then the compiler can
use therefore branch prediction henson
and reordering so they works that works
relatively well but you need to make
sure that your profiling that you're
doing matches production and sometimes
that means that you're very fast
sometimes i'm way off the mark at other
time
so it's kind of this thing that looks
really great and it is some of the time
it's good question okay this is an ASEAN
85 CPU how many cause does a said I
claim eight and the cause are on the
left and the right and what's in the
middle cache glorious glorious case l3
cache probably that 15 weeks worth of
cash very fast this is what you want how
many cores get access to this case all
of them well that sounds like a problem
because I want this case all to myself
yeah I turn off all but one of your
cause now you get the cash all to
yourself it's a neat trick it's not very
respectful for to a any Intel engineers
in the room today and as you know a
teenager I couldn't believe I'd be
having eight cores and working for
coming where I could turn all about one
of them off or 22 cores and turning all
one of them off it's a really effective
way of increasing the average l3 cache
per core Hey sorry
have I tried using a single-core CPU ah
interesting so have i tried using a
single core cpu or convincing someone to
make one that yes oh no I haven't the
answer to both of your questions we can
talk about that afterwards a little bit
but I suspect their Intel and not
necessarily going to be particularly
interested in what I would want because
my domain is such a small part of
Intel's market that's just my gut feel
yeah incidentally um they can go back
one yeah if you do run multiple cores
like normally you won't disable your
course but just be careful about what
other processes are running on other
cores that share the same cache if they
are noisy it's going to cost you if
you've got noisy neighbors get rid of
them put them on a completely different
CPU and somewhere else they will
probably help you out great quote
okay these are just sort of this is
nitpicking but this caught me out and it
caught people from other trading
companies out as well
placement you can be slightly
inefficient slightly so if you use any
of these compilers placement you will be
doing a null pointer check and if the
pointer that you pass into placement you
is no it won't construct the object I
won't distract the object and it will
return now back to the caller why
because that's what regular new does and
the spec was a little bit ambiguous as
to what placement you was me to do
so most compiler implementers just did
the same thing it's regular than you but
actually really inefficient why would
seem to us to an additional check for
you that's not the that's not the idea
of C++ you don't pay for what you don't
get right you don't pay for what you
don't use if you're going to pass a
pointer into a function you should make
sure that it's not or not null
yeah so Matt Gleeson and Jonathan
Wakeley got the spec updated the
standard updated so that's now undefined
undefined behavior to pass no one to
placement knew that means that the
compiler can stop doing this null
pointer check does this there's a single
null pointer check make a difference
actually it does yeah so if you were
right on the border of this function
being in lined and not being in mind in
this additional instruction could push
it over the top
also with GCC JC's he was particularly
sensitive to this and actually gave up
on a whole bunch of optimizations so
yeah now I'm just a small thing that
actually made quite a big difference
enough that several trading companies
picked up on this the if you can't use a
modern version of the compiler that has
the fix there's a quick workaround that
will work around at least in GCC
okay another thing that caught me at is
JCC five and below or below JCC 5.1
standard string it wasn't a great
implementation had copy-on-write
semantics and no small string
optimization that wasn't there so great
we moved to later versions of GCC
started using strings all over the place
but what do you know it was slow because
we use a standard distribution of red
hat and CentOS and the way that GCC is
packaged is it maintains a bi backwards
compatibility so it doesn't do the
standard string breaking change which
means that we're still stuck with the
old standard string implementation and
that was first noticed as being a bit
questionable by herb SATA in 1999 and
today in 2017 I'm still stuck with
copy-on-write strings another small
nitpick that Civitas 11 has this um what
we call it static local variable
initialization guarantees that static
will be initialized once and only once
even if multi-threaded even if an
exception comes in and blows away that
routine that will go okay we've not
initialized yet so very useful but of
course that doesn't come for free so
every time that you refer to that static
variable inside that function there's
going to be a slight cost which is
checking the guard variable to see if
that has been set or not so again it's a
minor nitpick that if you're absolutely
micro optimizing code this will have a
slight impact as well who knows the
standard function might allocate most
people yeah cool so that can be a little
bit surprising because sometimes it
doesn't allocate it depends on the
implementation you can do a small
function optimization in there around
about 16 bytes I think so this is what
GCC 7.2 this is a silly trivial example
but here we are we're not actually doing
anything we're capturing 24 bytes worth
of data but we're not doing anything
with it
we'll just optimize this right out GCC
doesn't so you actually see that there's
a allocation for this code and actually
ad allocation which I didn't print on
the screen that gets a little bit
annoying because standard functions are
actually very very useful so you'll see
that several people have implemented nan
allocating versions I believe there's
talks on this again I would possibly
claim today later on today but maybe I'm
wrong again but yeah if you want to go
check out this as a shameless plug by
the way but go check out s3 fourteenth's
and place function which doesn't
allocate it will allocate in place which
means that if you declare this function
on the stack that buffer for the closure
will be on the stack with compile time
static asserts and also runtime checks
if need be as well okay the very last
point for this section and then we've
only got a small section to go is G Lib
C can be particularly evil if you're
looking to do low latency stuff so
standard power if you call it with 1 to
the power of 1.4 you'll get the right
answer if you call it one point zero to
the power of one point five you're also
going to get the right answer but one's
gonna be way slower than the other it's
not quite 1.0 by the way it's 1.0 with a
little bit of rounding error in there
but if you look at these timings if we
go one to one point four 53 nanos on
both an old version of G Lipsy in a new
version of G Lib C great if you do it
with 1.5 the pathological case you're in
trouble
half a millisecond to calculate one
single computation of power reason is
the function it's transcendental it'll
try to be accurate if we try to be
accurate fast if not it'll try to be
accurate slow so this is caught us out
this it's effectively crashed our auto
traders because if you try to calculate
this a thousand times quickly everything
kind of stops yeah relatively surprising
you can upgrade to G Lib C 2.21 which is
a couple of years old now I think
that'll help you out but most standard
distros of Linux
we'll be packaged with 2.17 so again
something to watch out for while I'm on
this topic another thing which isn't on
my sights but I should mention is try to
avoid system calls system course will
just kill you so you don't want to be
going to the kernel at all you want just
your C++ code to be run you want to get
all interrupts absolutely away from the
core that you're running you want your
hot path to be running on a single core
nothing else need to know about that
single core any sort of system calls I
could call to select or a call to kernel
space TCP or anything that might invoke
a system call whatsoever you want to get
rid of that sorry just popped into my
head I thought I should say
not particularly funny but very true so
the final section I need a couple of
slides actually hey I've got a reminder
talk yes that is right that could have
gone far worse okay um there's two ways
to kind of measure things really or two
common approaches one it's the profile
see what your code is doing the other
one say actually benchmarking tainment
these three things are subtly different
so profiling is good it can show you how
look you're spending most of your time
and Malik wait wait why are you even in
Malik this makes no sense whereas
benchmarking is actually start and stop
right this is how fast we are if you
make a improvement to your code based on
profiling that's great but maybe your
codes not faster maybe it's slower you
know you're just guessing need to
measure once you finish measuring
measure again and then measure one third
time one more time a third time okay so
G prof a sampling profiler G prof is
great for checking out what your code is
doing but it's not going to work if most
of the time your code is doing nothing
and then for 300 or 400 nanoseconds all
of a sudden it's doing something and
then it goes back to being idle do proof
is going to tell you that you're doing
absolutely nothing
it's going to miss the actual events
that you care about G profs are out
they'll ground cool great fantastic can
tell you actually what your code is
doing which functions it's going into
how much memory you're using but it's
basically a virtual machine that's
simulating the CPU it doesn't even take
into account IO characteristics it's
gone as well it's too intrusive it's not
gonna give you accurate performance
results I've been talking about micro
benchmarking a lot it's kind of ok but
don't rely on it because if you're
sitting there spinning in an absolute
tight loop doing map looker
that's a very different characteristic
from what your code is going to be doing
in production when it's doing a one-off
map lookup once every eight trillion
cycles so benchmarks are kind of nice
for nap shootouts a little bit and
things like that but you can only take
them so far now all of these tools are
really useful don't get me wrong I use
all of them that great but not
necessarily for that very last step of
micro benchmarking of sorry of micro
optimizing your code so we need
something else so this is what I use and
it's by far the most accurate
benchmarking system I can come up with
what you do is you actually set up a
production system the server on the left
here is replaying market data in real
time across a network and my code is
running on the server on the right
picking up the market data and then from
time to time sending a trade or a
request to trade back across the wire to
where it thinks is the exchange of
course it's just a fake exchange what
I've got in the middle is a switch and
the switch is tapped into the network
and it's unobtrusively capturing every
packet that's going across the way and
recording it and also putting a
timestamp into either the header or the
footer at the ever net packet so
actually recording that true time that
that packet went across the way probably
within a accuracy of 5 nanoseconds or
something like that then afterwards once
you've done an hour or a day's worth of
simulated trading then you can analyze
the packets look at which packets
triggered an event compare the timestamp
of the corresponding packet Lee got
seemed out how to exchange to a
difference of the timestamps and that
will tell you their actual true time
that it's taking for your system to run
and if you see a speed up in this lab
setup you'll see a speed up in
production if you see a slowdown in the
lab you'll see a slowdown in production
credibly hard to set up you have to get
this perfect all the time you'll forget
you know you
you forgot to turn off particular
interrupts oh you forgot to see it CPU
affinity or someone decided it might be
a good idea to build on that server
because they found that it was free and
very few people were on it so they you
know range ECC on 24 cores but this is
this is a real pain it's not easy to set
up but it's by far the most accurate way
to do true measurement okay so the brief
summary is you don't need to be an
expert about C++ but you do need to know
it relatively well if you want fast low
latency software you have to understand
your compiler you have to understand
what your compilers trying to do and
help your compiler along from time to
time knowing the machine architecture
will help knowing the impact of cache
the impact of other processes it's going
to help you make create design decisions
ultimately aim for really really simple
logic so not just simple logic that get
rid of your logic if you can go first
static asserts Const expressions
templates you know just try to make your
compilers life as easy as possible and
that respect or or reduce your code as
much the best thing about this is
compilers optimized simple code the best
by fast simple code runs faster than
complex code it's just effect just as
sometimes you don't need perfect
precision right it's sometimes an
approximation that's absolutely fine and
if the approximation is fast that's
great there's no point calculating you
know a theoretical price to twelve
significant digits if really only two
digits would do and if you need to do
expensive work don't do it on the hop
path just do it when you think it's a
quiet time yeah and ultimately it's
about measurement if you can't measure
you're basically just kissing so it's
incredible like every time that I think
this code is going to be faster did it
measure it it's always slower I always
get it wrong it's difficult
okay so that's me this was quite
lightweight not entirely scientific it's
more gesture hey this is the sort of
things that we do and I hope you found
that somewhat useful did people learn
something yeah a little bit so so okay
cool
please thank you there's got a couple
minutes for questions if anyone feel
second Hey hi hi can you comment in the
use cases where you were only using one
core on the multi-core chip do you know
if Intel's turbo boost was helping you
out at all or not yeah that's a yeah
it's a good question so I could spend
another hour or two talking about the
actual system to any type of it won't go
into too much detail here but
effectively you need to be very careful
with turbo boost and different states
you just want things to be constant you
don't want things to be jumping up and
down and yeah cool hey ah so good yeah
hi hi so one quick thing the actual
question is on newer architecture so you
can actually force the l3 cache
partition okay you already know but I
just said just recap yes sir no one
heard that
well I just cut you off yeah there is
you don't just have to turn off CPUs you
can actually lock the case with latest
failures of latest versions of Intel
CPUs when you describe the hash table
the layout in memory was you had like an
array and you had the the full hash
which you keep and then a pointer but
like usually in the H of T you only
really care about access not insertion
insertions often outside of the critical
path current always but often so why not
instead have if you have the key values
in an array as well you can just use the
index of the hash itself to access that
and now you're only storing the hashes
in the first lookup array so you get
eight instead of four so why not if I
understand the question correctly
weren't that put more pressure on your
cache because you actually have
hash values pair cache line well you'll
have more cuz you're not storing the
pointer at all
you're just the the first layer of the
lookup is just into an array with
nothing but the hashes I say we check
you verify that the hash is correct you
just use the index and go into the key
value array yeah you could do that but
that's going to also if as long as
you're very confident that you're not
getting too many collisions so I think
you're gonna get to trade off I see I
think I see what you're saying and yeah
you could do that but that's it's huming
a pretty damn good hash function I think
but this these always these there's no
right and wrong answer I think for hash
tables it's always a bit of a sliding
scale all right Thank You Jess hey so
I'm interested about the way you talked
about using only one CPU unlocking the
others at one core do do you mean that
you are going to use one thread as well
oh yeah and how does that work when you
have multiple data sources that you need
to know to look at and everything like
yeah yeah yeah yeah sure so this is
getting away from the secret west side
which I purposely didn't want to talk
about being in Satan's press conference
about very very briefly yeah exactly one
one thread on that one core that's it
that's the fast thread but of course you
can from time to time poll data coming
in once every few hundred milliseconds
then hold the data statistically you
should be okay at all very much depends
on how much data is coming in if you've
got a lot of data coming in didn't know
you'd need a second thread but yeah
effectively I mean though the data that
you need to respond quickly the data
from the market hmm so you you can't
actually pull them because then you you
reduce your latency I get repaid you
could also have something ahead of you
doing a little bit of a low pass filter
or discarding mmm more of the data yeah
you can you definitely have a component
ahead filtering a lot of that out for
you otherwise yeah you'll be saturated I
see yeah thank you yeah you're welcome
hi just a small point you said consider
deleting large objects in another thread
yeah one of the things I've been burned
by is that will drain the TC malloc size
class for that
and then cause global mutex locks across
all your threads when you allocate or
deallocate in that size class yeah I was
wondering if someone would pick up on
that true
we actually often ou allocate on that
separate thread as well and just pass
the pointer across yeah good point now
it's praying no one would pick up on
that hi hey these things like built-in
expects to mark branches it's likely or
unlikely yeah so this will have to be
the last question correct yeah yeah and
I deleted those from my slides this
morning cuz I ran out of time as we have
just done it as well and yeah
----builtin expect definitely for those
who don't know about it it's just a
macro that's wolf force will tell the
compiler hey this is the branch that I
want you to take absolutely you can use
that but it's not the Silver Bullet
everything is about getting that
hardware branch predictor trained up in
saying that if you have a function which
is called very very irregularly and you
won that function to be fast when it's
called the hardware branch predictor has
zero information in that case yeah
you're likely true and likely false
branch prediction hints or exactly what
you need to make sure that the correct
path has hit good question thank you so
we've got a we can catch up afterwards
if maybe we have to times up now we can
talk afterwards
yeah okay thank you